Interested in getting an editor for a Wavestation original, EX, or A/D?
Converting this code to handle other Wavestation types (or more likely,
subclassing it and making new files) will pose some challenges.  Here are
a few things you'll need to do:

1. The A/D has a few more parameters (reading in from analog) which need
   to be implemented.  The widgets are commented out in the code here but
   other stuff will have to be written in too.

2. Other Wavestations have different bank configurations, and this will
   impact on the bank choice options, as well as the list of default
   wave sequence and wave names, and also any list of default patch or
   performance names.

3. Other Wavestations have less complex sysex, particularly for bulk dumps.

4. Other Wavestations will allow you to do patch writes.  The SR does not
   and so that feature is turned off and workarounds were installed.  You'll
   need to turn it back on and remove the workarounds.

5. THE BIG ONE.  There is no way to emit a single Wave Sequence.  The SR
   has special commands (implemented as individual parameters) which allow
   the patch editor to "emit" a Wave Sequence by first erasing the existing
   sequence, then inserting one wave after another.  This involves SR
   parameter options which are not available in the other synthesizers and
   I do not know if there is any way to do a similar trick in them.  Your only
   alternative may be to load the entire block of waves sequences, untangle
   them, modify the wave sequence in question, and re-write the block.  YUCK!
   In addition to this being a lot of work, it also involves a process which
   doesn't work well with Edisyn's workflow.  Specifically, Edisyn is designed
   to send requests for dumps, and if a dump arrives, Edisyn will automatically
   update to it.  However here Edisyn will need to send a request for a dump,
   then be cognizant of the fact that the next dump that arrives is not meant
   to be updated to, but rather to be untangled, modified, and then sent back
   out to the synth.  If the dump doesn't come in (a sysex error say), then
   Edisyn needs to at some point realize that new dumps are in fact incoming
   reads that should be updated to again.  The state machine for that will
   be complicated to wire up.  You can contact me if you reach this point and
   need some advice.

6. Other Wavestations likely have fewer effects.  You'll need to modify the
   effects emitting and parsing.

7. Other Wavestations have fewer parameter options.  You'll have to check to
   see if Edisyn is implementing any parameter options that they can't do.
   Particularly note #5 above.

8. The SR can update its mix envelope dimensions to any value -127...127.
   But other Wavestations may not be able to do this and you might have to
   pre-bound values.

There's more than this no doubt.   But it's enough to get you started.

Sean Luke
sean@cs.gmu.edu






