KNOWN BUGS

These are bugs, errors, and misfeatures that I have identified and 
reported to ASM as of March, 2023, Hydrasynth firmware version 1.5.5.  
Some 2.0.0-specific bugs are noted as well.  I am aware of only one
or two having been fixed at this point, but am not certain.


Note that many of these errors concern NRPN, parameter display, and 
sysex.  This is because I am building a patch editor, so I have triggered 
these errors.  But not all: see the touch strip functionality missteps 
below for example.



0. MISSING SYSEX.  The Hydrasynth was released in 2020 and ASM has still 
not provided a sysex specification.  As a result, despite being a 
popular machine, the Hydrasynth has only a (IMHO not great) proprietary 
librarian and a single third-party editor which can upload and download 
patches, and prior to Edisyn no open source software whatsoever.  Edisyn
required reverse engineering the spec.

It is not clear what the Hydrasynth is actually capable of doing.  From
reverse engineering I believe the sysex can (1) request to download all 
the names of patches in a bank (2) request to download or upload a 
single patch from a bank [uploading actually causes the Hydrasynth to 
rewrite its entire Flash RAM!] (3) request to download or upload an 
entire bank [again rewriting Flash].  Because of complaints from the 
Sigabort patch editor documentation, I believe that the Hydrasynth 
does not have any sysex command to download its current working memory 
patch.  Furthermore it does not have a way to upload a patch to its 
current working memory -- rather the Hydrasynth unfortunately keeps 
*all patches* in current working memory and you are only permitted to 
(4) upload a patch to a specific slot in current working memory.

#4 is a very, *very* bad design decision. Let's say you want to upload
a patch to A30 in order to audition it (not write it to Flash).  Okay,
you can do that.  But then you switch to B15 to edit it for a bit.  Then
you decide to write B15.  The Hydrasynth does so, but it will ALSO write
out your temporary audition changes to A30.  This is because the
Hydrasynth weirdly keeps ALL patches in memory in Flash and writes ALL
of them out when you ask it to write B15.

This forces editors (Edisyn and Sigabort Midisynth I believe) to reserve
a patch slot (in this case H128) as a "scratch patch" -- all auditions 
are sent there, and we don't care if it's overwritten.  That's pretty 
unfortunate.

Any other capabilities of the machine are secret and proprietary to ASM
at present as they will not release their sysex spec.


1. ILLEGAL SYSEX.  The Hydrasynth has the options to "Send Patch" or 
"Send Bank" on its front panel.  These emit illegal sysex.  
Specifically, "Send Patch" emits sysex starting with the bytes F0 01 03 
05 07 ..., but F0 01 is the private namespace for Sequential.  
Furthermore, "Send Bank" emits sysex starting with the bytes F0 02 04 06 
08 ..., but F0 02 is the private namespace for Big Briar.  Additionally, 
though the manual says that these options will emit to both USB and 
5-pin DIN MIDI, in fact they will only emit to 5-pin DIN MIDI.


2. INVALID NRPN UPDATE ON WAKEUP.  When the Hydrasynth goes to sleep, if 
you wake it up, certain parameters will be incorrectly displayed as 
offset from messages sent to them via NRPN.  I have particularly noticed 
this with Delay Time (BPM Sync OFF).  In order to fix this, you have to 
force the Delay Time parameter down to zero, which appears to reset it.


3. NRPN DOCUMENTATION ERRORS.

	- Delay Time (0x41 0x74) is actually Delay Time (BPM Sync OFF)
	- Delay Time (BPM Sync ON) (0x43 0x74) is missing from the NRPN 
	  Documentation
	- Arpeggiator Tempo (0x3F 0x38) is missing from the NRPN Documentation
	- Arpeggiator On/Off (0x39 0x03) is missing from the NRPN Documentation
	- Chord Button Pressed (0x3F 0x16) is missing from the NRPN 
	  Documentation
	- The following NRPN message (0x3F 0x38) is occasionally sent when 
	  the patch select dial is turned.  Its purpose is unknown.  It is 
	  missing from the NRPN Documentation.
	- The following NRPN message (0x3F 0x57) is emitted when Tap Trig is 
	  turned ON but not OFF on the panel.  Its purpose is unknown.  It is 
	  missing from the NRPN Documentation.
	- CC 0x0F is just labelled "Delay Time" but it is actually
	  Delay Time BPM Sync OFF
	- There are many, MANY more documentation errors.  See here for
	  a table of proper NRPN messages, ranges, and display values:
	  https://github.com/eclab/edisyn/tree/master/edisyn/synth/asmhydrasynth/info

4. BROKEN ALL SOUNDS OFF HANDLING.  The Hydrasynth does not properly 
handle CC 120, All Sounds Off.  To start with, it has reallocated that 
CC to another function, Arp Octave (!).  Second, it has a proprietary 
NRPN message, "All notes off and effect silence" (3F 57), which only 
gets partly there (it doesn't stop envelope releases), but in my testing 
it is not clear that it works at all.


5. MISSING NRPN PATCH PARAMETERS.  The following patch parameters cannot 
be set by NRPN:

	Patch Category
	Patch Color
	Patch Name
	Macro 1 Name
	Macro 2 Name
	Macro 3 Name
	Macro 4 Name
	Macro 5 Name
	Macro 6 Name
	Macro 7 Name
	Macro 8 Name


6. BROKEN ARP TAP TRIG.  ---- FIXED 2.0.0 ----
When you send the Arp Tap Trig NRPN, it ALSO 
turns the arpeggiator on/off.  This does not happen if you turn Arp Tap 
Trig on/off from the front panel.  This is a *major* error, as it means 
you can't update a patch via NRPN without accidentally turning the Arp 
on or off.


7. UNDERUSED BUTTONS.  At present, all categorical parameters have to be 
selected via the encoder -- even boolean ones!  You can't set them by 
just toggling the button below the encoder.  You have to twist the 
encoder a fair bit, and remember what direction to turn it.


8. TOUCH STRIP MISSING IMPORTANT FUNCTIONALITY.  One would imagine that 
the Yamaha CS80 served as the inspiration for the ribbon strip and 
polyphonic aftertouch on the Hydrasynth.  But the ribbon strip on the 
CS80 has considerable functionality that is missing from the Hydrasynth.  
See here for a number of examples of important things that the 
Hydrasynth ribbon strip can't do that are very simple to implement, and 
which the CS80 did easily:

	https://youtu.be/sV3qDUTVsNo?t=1487

For example:  

[A] Play a chord, hold it down, and press your finger on the ribbon 
strip.  Then drag the finger to another location.  Pitch bend occurs. 
But then if you LET GO of the ribbon strip, on the CS80 the pitch bend 
stays where you had last bent it.  Recentering only happens when you let 
go of the notes.  On the Hydrasynth, the pitch bend unfortunately 
recenters immediately when you release the ribbon strip.  This makes it 
*very hard* to do Bladerunner-style pitch pulls on the Hydrasynth.  When 
you let go of the ribbon strip, the value should stay where you left it 
rather than resetting.  And when you newly press the ribbon strip, the 
value should continue relative to there rather than resetting to that 
position.

[B] On the CS-80, if you bend up with the ribbon, the range is different 
than if you bend down.  On the Hydrasynth, they are the same.

[C] There is no option to change the ribbon bend range.  You can only 
change the pitch wheel bend range.  I find the ribbon bend range to be 
often much too small or much too big.

[D] CS-80's "Sustain Mode II" allows you to play a chord, hold it down 
with the SUSTAIN PEDAL, then play other notes and only the other notes 
are affected by the ribbon strip.  This is a very useful playing feature 
used heavily by Vangelis and others.  It is at present impossible on the 
Hydrasynth.



9. UNHELPFUL NRPN RESPONSES.  When you set the ribbon mode to THEREMIN 
on the Hydrasynth via NRPN, it responds by dumping all the theremin 
values back via NRPN.  As a result, if the musician is using a patch 
editor to change to theremin mode, the Hydrasynth responds by 
unhelpfully trying to reset all of the changes he made in his editor.  
This happens for a number of other parameters as well: changing one 
parameter causes the Hydrasynth to respond with NRPN messages that serve 
no function except to unhelpfully reset parameters on one's editor.  The 
Hydrasynth should *never* respond to an NRPN message with another NRPN 
message.



10. BACKWARD ENVELOPE ATTACK CURVE.  The envelope attack curve knob is 
labeled backwards.  If you turn the knob to +64, the curve is, just like 
the decay and release curves, exponential.  However the knob is 
mislabelled "Log 64".  This is wrong.  Similarly, if you turn the knob 
to -64, the curve is, just like the decay and release curves, 
logarithmic.  However the knob is mislabelled "Exp -64".

Some people may not be aware of what an exponential attack curve 
actually looks like.  One might assume that, being "exponential", the 
curve starts off slowly and then shoots up vertically.  But this is not 
correct.  On a synthesizer, an exponential curve describes an 
*exponential decrease in the rate of change*.  That is, the curve starts 
off rapidly towards its target destination, and then slows down.  For an 
attack curve, this means that the curve shoots up FIRST, then heads out 
horizontally to slowly reach the target destination.  Some googling will 
probably convince you of this.

I do not know if this mislabelling was a mistake on ASM's part or if it 
was intentional, but in both cases it's an error and should be fixed.



11. NO DISPLAY UPDATES.  When updating the mod matrix via NRPN, changes 
in the values are not reflected on screen.  You have to page away and 
then back to see the values properly updated.  This is also true when 
updating the macro assignments via NRPN.  You have to page away and then 
back to see the values properly updated.



12. POOR NRPN HANDLING.  It appears that the Hydrasynth has difficulty 
receiving the full complement of NRPN messages for a patch in series at 
full speed.  However at present in the absence of any sysex spec, the 
**only way** to update the current working patch memory of the 
Hydrasynth is to send all the parameters as separate NRPN messages.

It's not entirely clear what's happening, but I believe that the 
Hydrasynth does not have a large enough buffer to handle incoming 
messages; some messages (such as mode changes or BPM Sync toggles) might 
require more time than others to process, and as a result certain NRPN 
messages are dropped on the floor.  I would describe this as a critical 
bug.



13. NRPN PARAMETER-PACKING.  NRPN provides a space of 16384 different 
parameter numbers.  But even though this is more than enough even for 
the Hydrasynth Deluxe, the Hydrasynth has ignored this.  Instead many 
parameters in the Hydrasynth are packed into the same parameter number.  
These parameters are then distinguished by the MSB of their value, with 
the LSB of the value being the *actual* value of the parameter.  As far 
as I know, this unfortunate behavior is unique in the synth world.  This 
is one of several problems which force editors to highly customize 
parameter emitting and parsing, rather than just use a simple table as 
is the case for other synthesizers.  [At least the Hydrasynth doesn't do
bit-packing -- requiring you to send multiple parameters at the same
time crammed into the same NRPN message -- for which I am grateful].


14. INCONSISTENT WAVE RANGES.  The osc1type parameter is [0-218] 
reprepsenting all waves from 0=Sine to 218=Harmon23.  Likewise the 
osc1wavescanwave1 parameter follows this convention.  However the 
osc1wavescanwave2 through osc1wavescanwave8 parameters are [0-220] 
representing 0=Off, 1=Silence, 2=Sine, ... to 220=Harmon23.  As a 
result, the osc1type and osc1wavescanwave1 parameter values don't line 
up with osc1wavescanwave2 through osc1wavescanwave8. This could have 
been trivially fixed by defining osc1type and osc1wavescanwave1 ranges 
to just be [2-220].


15. VERY HIGHLY INCONSISTENT AND UNDOCUMENTED NRPN PARAMETER RANGES AND 
DISPLAYS.  The Hydrasynth's patch parameters are a crazyquilt of 
inconsistent ranges and displays.  It took nearly a month for me to 
document all the range/display information because no two parameters are 
alike.  I am publishing an Excel spreadsheet of all the parameters and 
how to display each one (see nrpn.xlsx and nrpn.pdf).

Many parameters are implemented as values from 0...1024 (not 0...1023!), 
but are displayed more coarsely, by dividing the parameter by some 
(non-power-of-2!) value N and then either *rounding* to the nearest 
integer with 0.5 rounded towards even, or rounding with 0.5 rounded 
towards zero, or by taking the *floor*, seemingly at whim.  The displays 
do not reflect the actual parameter values: there may be several 
internal parameter values which all display as "0.04" on the machine due 
to the display coarseness, but they are unique.  Furthermore these 
parameters are not emitted as NRPN values 0...1024, but rather are 
emitted as 8...8192 in steps of 8.

The vast majority of signed parameters are in one's complement, that is, 
-N ... +N are emitted in order as 0...2N.  But for some reason, six 
parameters are in *two's* complement, that is, 0 ... +N are emitted as 
0...N, and then -N ... -1 are emitted as N+1 ... 2N.  To make matters 
worse, three of these parameters are *one byte* two's complement, and 
three are *two byte* two's complement.

Many parameters (lfo rates, etc.) are displayed with pseudoexponential 
or other arbitrary values, but the mapping of the underlying parameter 
values to the displayed values is not based on any function, but rather 
requires an undocumented table lookup.  These tables are completely 
different from one another: in some cases they're 127 in length, in 
other cases, 128, 1024, or 1025.  Only in the case of the 
lfoXratesyncoff parameters does the mapping appear to follow an
actual computable function, but its range (1281) is unusually large.
The others require elaborate and detailed combinations of functions 
and tables to reproduce faithfully, which are entirely undocumented.  
The "delay time BPM sync off" parameter is particularly bad. 

Metric NRPN parameter ranges are all over the map.  Some ranges are 
0...100, others 0...127, others 0...128, others 0...1020, others 
0...1023, others 0...1024, and still others ranges such as [464...800]
by 8, [0...2880] by 8, [128...8000] by 8, [0...4800] by 8, [408...8160], 
[1...400], [5...560], etc.  None of this is documented.


16. RIBBON MOD HOLD IS ABSOLUTE

Ribbon Hold should apply to BOTH Pitch Bend and to Mod Wheel.  And it 
should be *relative*, but .  That is, if you let go of the ribbon, it 
should stay where it is (that's happening now), AND if you press AGAIN, 
it should be changed relative to your new finger position, NOT jump to 
that position (that's NOT happening now).  

For example, if you have Hold on, and you slide your finger down the 
strip to the bottom, it should bend down to the bottom.  When you let 
go, it stays bent down.  When you reapply your finger to (say) the 
middle of the strip, it should NOT pop up to  the finger position.  
If you bend down from the middle of the strip, it should continue to 
bend down FURTHER than from where you had left it (subject to bounds 
you have defined of course).


17. MISSING VOICE PARAMETERS

It appears that Voice Snap is a per-patch parameter, and its NRPN is 
0x3F 0x35.  But this is not documented.

Additionally, Voice Scale and Voice Key Lock also appear to be per-patch 
parameters (I think?) but they do not emit an NRPN message that indicates 
their status: instead they emit a single NRPN message 0x3 0x45, always 
fixed to 1, and then emit 0x3F 0x52 with an MSB of X and an LSB of Y 
indicating that note X will be mapped to note Y.  This doesn't help nail 
down which scale it is, and doesn't help at all for microtuned scales.


18. INVALID NRPN PARAMETER

Envelope 2 Trigger Source 1 has an NRPN parameter (0x3A 0x64), even 
though it cannot be changed per the manual.


19. VOWEL ORDER IGNORED

The Hydrasynth emits NRPN for Filter 1 Vowel Order (0x3F 0x2E), but 
ignores it if it receives it.


20. GLOBAL VS PATCH PARAMETERS

Unlike other synthesizers, the Hydrasynth does not distinguish between
options which set global parameters, options which perform functions,
and options which set patch parameters.  Thus you cannot at first glance
determine which of the changes you've made will be saved when you save
out a patch.  In most synthesizers, global options are sequestered
in a submenu or area called "Global" or "System" or whatnot.  On the
Hydrasynth a great many of them are mixed in with patch parameters in
some kind of unholy bouillabaisse.  It can be very frustrating to set
a parameter only to discover later that it wasn't saved with your patch.
There's an easy fix to this: just add some little indication in the
OLED screens that a given parameter is global, or is some kind of
function, rather than is a patch parameter proper.

21. MACRO INITIALIZATION

If you attempt to initialize a macro slot which is already initialized and 
empty, initializing will instead mistakenly try to initialize the entire patch.

22. NO BACKSTOP (2.0.0)

Vibrato amount is supposed to emit NRPN values from 0 to 120: but it only
emits values from 13 to 120.

23. BROKEN VOICE MODULATION, LFO QUANTIZE, AND ENV QUANTIZE NRPN (2.0.0)

The Hydrasynth multiplies values by 8 when outputting voice modulation NRPN, but
does not divide them by 8 when inputting them from NRPN.  The exact same
goes for LFO Quantize and ENV Quantize.

24. BROKEN SUSTAIN NRPN (2.0.0)

Sustain NRPN is has the same problem as #23 above: it's outputted in 
multiples of 8 but inputted in multiples of 1.

25. ASSORTED NRPN BUGS

Many additional NRPN parameters have errors.  Search for "BUG:" or "Bug:" or
whatnot here:

https://github.com/eclab/edisyn/blob/master/edisyn/synth/asmhydrasynth/info/nrpn.pdf

26. ARP TEMPO IGNORED

The Hydrasynth will emit NRPN for Arp Temp, but will not accept it.

27. ENV DELAY

Both the delay sync on and delay sync off, when sent over NRPN, update the same
parameter.  This is not the case for attack, decay, hold, or release.  This was
a most annoying bug to track down.

28. LFO BPM SYNC

Sort of related to 27 above.  Sending LFO Delay BPM Sync On or LFO Fade In BPM 
Sync On over NRPN will change the Hydrasynth value regardless of whether BPM 
Sync is turned On or Off.  The opposite is not the case however (sending LFO 
Delay BPM Sync Off for example).  This is not the case for LFO Rate Sync On.

29. MATRIX AND MACRO VALUES

Sources, destinations, depths, and even destination categories can be set via 
NRPN individually of one another even though they are connected.  For example, 
if a source or destination is set to OFF, the depths and button depths can 
still be set via NRPN.  This would ordinarily be just fine, except that this 
isn't the case from the front panel: initializing them to OFF makes it 
impossible to set the depths etc.  It's not consistent.  Additionally, you 
can set a destination without setting its category: the category appears 
to be entirely ornamental.

30. NON-SANITIZED PARAMETER VALUES IN SYSEX

There are many parameters on the Hydrasynth which are not double-checked 
for bugs prior to dumping. 

Examples:

- When Patch C/011 (Dust Pad VG) is dumped to an editor over sysex, 
the voice density parameter is sent as 9, which is not valid (it says 4 
on-screen).  If you modify the parameter back to 4, then save it, and 
dump again, it comes out as 4. 

- Sometimes I'll get the Hydrasynth to send me 130 (13.0) for Vibrato 
Amount in the patch sysex even though the maximum value is 120.

31. POOR IMPLEMENTATION OF MIDI TUNING STANDARD (MICROTUNING)

The Hydrasynth has a poor implementation of the dump and dump-request 
rules for the MIDI Tuning Standard.

The MIDI Tuning standard allows editors to do either of the following:

1. WRITE a scale to any of 128 scale patch slots
2. REQUEST any of 128 scale patch slots

However the Hydrasynth refuses the first message unless "Receive Scale" 
has been pressed, and it disregards the specified scale slot.
Furthermore it entirely refuses the second message in all cases.  You
can only get the Hydrasynth to dump to you by manually pressing "Send
Scale".  This makes librarians impossible for Microtuning scales on 
the Hydrasynth.

Suggestion:

	- If the editor WRITES a scale to slot N (0...128), and the 
	  Hydrasynth is not in "Receive Scale" mode, it is automatically 
	  written to slot N mod 4.

	- If the editor WRITES a scale to slot N (0...128), and the 
	  Hydrasynth IS in "Receive Scale" mode, it is written to the 
	  slot specified on the Hydrasynth.

	- If the editor REQUESTS scale N (0...128), then the Hydrasynth 
	  always provides slot N mod 4.

	- The Hydrasynth is free to send a scale when in "Send Scale" mode.

32. PROBLEMATIC PROGRAM CHANGE BEHAVIOR

If you do a PC to a patch on the Hydrasynth, and the Hydrasynth is 
already at that patch, the PC is entirely ignored.  This is very unusual 
behavior, and it is bad because it means the only way for a musician to 
guarantee that he's reloaded a patch from RAM via MIDI is to do a PC on 
some OTHER patch, and then PC BACK to the patch he wants.  Obviously 
this won't be supported by a number of tools, and is a significant
problem for editors.  

33. SENDING TO CURRENT PATCH

If you update a patch via sysex but do not issue a Write (that is, 
command 14 00), it does not get an asterisk ("*") next to its patch 
number even though it has been modified in current working memory.

34. [SERIOUS] WINDOWS + JAVA + USB DATA CORRUPTION

When connecting to the ASM Hydrasynth over its USB port from 
Windows, and using Java (Edisyn runs in Java), the sysex messages 
sent are corrupted in some cases and lost in others.  It is not 
yet clear if this is an ASM bug or a Windows bug.  However, 
using a good USB MIDI interface (I am using a Tascam US 2x2) 
works just fine, implying that this may be a Hydrasynth issue.  
Additionally using Linux or MacOS works flawlessly connected 
over USB to the Hydrasynth or over 5-pin DIN.

